Carter Carnival 25th Anniversary Project, interviewer Steve Fletcher, interviewee Jane
Winterbottom. Today's date is the 13th of October 2015 and the location of the interview
is the Swiffer office. Jane, before we start, would you be kind enough to spell your name
in full please?
J-A-N-E-W-I-N-T-E-R-B-O-W-T-O-N.
Thank you very much. Jane, can you remember when you first made contact with Carter Carnival?
Yes, it was through a friend of mine who was involved with it anyway. She wanted someone,
they needed people in the carnival so I volunteered. I did the workshops, made, what year was it,
do you know, it was 2010?
2010, yes.
So me and a friend went to the workshops and we made our ladies in waiting costume, did
the carnival. I also did a St. David's Day parade as well because they were short of
people so I volunteered for that and then got involved with the swicker, you know, the
carnival workshops.
Got it. In the St. David's Day parade, were you a red dragon in big wings?
I was a red dragon.
Was it sunny that St. David's Day?
Yes, it was.
Excellent.
Yes, it was a lovely day actually, yes, it was really good. It was the first sort of
time I'd done the actual parade and it was really exciting.
Excellent. Of course, with wings on, they're relatively light and reasonably good in a
high wind but of course...
It was a bit windy and they were going over our faces a bit so we had to...
Veiled dragons present stumbling into a manhole.
Yes, it was good fun. There was a good crowd actually watching us so that makes a difference.
But from a relatively light pair of wings, you progressed in your carnival career to
wearing a much bigger costume. Would you care to tell us...
Yes, I was a football. A very heavy football.
It's great, lovely. I was a football.
I was a football.
The main football, which was very heavy. I had it on my shoulders.
On a backpack?
On a backpack, yes, which is quite hard to keep up actually. You don't realise as you're
walking, it's very heavy. You put it on, you think, oh, it'll be fine. And then as you're
walking, because it's quite a long route, you're walking for about at least an hour.
90 minutes is quite normal.
Oh yeah, an hour and a half. And you're supposed to try and do it...
Including getting ready because of course you've got to get it all new.
You've got your face paint done, you've got to get everything set up as well. So you've
been on for a long time and it gets heavier as you go, definitely. And I think it was
raining then as well, so everything was wet and everything was coming off.
Slowly disintegrating in the parade.
Yes, slowly, leaving a trail of glitter and sequins as we walked along. But no, because
all the face paint was going as well because everything was in face paint and of course
it was raining.
It starts to run. It's a good look.
Yeah, it is a good look.
And what music were you dancing to?
It was the...
Wonder Brass?
Wonder Brass, that's right.
Excellent.
They keep us going. Good morale, so everyone's having a dance. So yeah, you've got to dance
with your back.
And you were sort of like the mothership to a satellite.
Yes, I had a lot of little couples behind me.
You had a lot of little couples behind you, but they weren't all back backs.
Yeah, they were just dressed up and they just had little sort of...
If I understand correctly, I think this was entirely attributed to the fact, was it the World Cup?
The World Cup, yes it was.
Absolutely. So it wasn't completely random.
No, no, it had a meaning.
Yeah, absolutely. Absolutely.
But after your adventures in Carnival, you then got involved with our regular performance
group, the Carnival crew.
Yes.
Tell us more about that. How did you get involved and what were your experiences?
That was through Caroline again.
Right.
Yes.
She's got a lot to answer for, hasn't she?
She's a hefty recruiter.
Right, right.
Well, after that experience, I just thought, yeah, actually I quite like it.
So I'll do it.
I'll do it.
So yeah, I started doing the bells, which was great.
There was me and about three others doing the bells.
Excellent.
Of course, people doing drums and things like that.
I can't remember my first gig, but we did a couple.
We did a parade in Newport.
We did Barry, an evening performance in Barry.
Of course, Festival No. 6 as well.
Let's talk about Festival No. 6.
So this is a wonderful and award winning festival in Portmurray in North Wales,
which if people don't know is the fabulous sort of folly on a grand scale by the architect William Clough Ellis.
Yes, it's an amazing place.
It's just so beautiful, isn't it?
Totally random, but just amazing.
Random in a carnivalesque way.
Oh, yeah, definitely.
It sort of speaks to carnival, doesn't it?
Yes, totally.
It's just quirky and eccentric.
Statues everywhere, nice colors, nice shapes.
Yes, definitely.
Yes.
And in fact, so you'd been in the carnival crew the very first time that Swicker played Festival No. 6.
And in fact, unless I'm mistaken, you were at the front of the parade, weren't you?
In mara-katu dresses, very brightly colored dresses.
Yes, we were.
Very much sort of opening the space.
Yeah, I think the bells were at the front.
I think Sally then us, the bells, yes, and then the drummers.
So yeah, we were in the front of the parade, but that was amazing as well.
That was brilliant.
Coming down into the piazza.
Yes.
Yes, and then up onto the stage.
But the reaction was brilliant.
Yeah, I really enjoyed that.
I think we did two days, didn't we?
Yes, absolutely.
I mean, the big contribution that Swicker makes is the carnival.
But of course, then you took in other performances in the piazza, didn't you?
All kinds of stuff.
Yeah, we did.
Which was absolutely smashing.
I know.
We did have a little bit of sun, but basically it was raining and we were camping.
We were camping in a waterlogged field.
How was it for you?
My tent leaked and I was soaking, so it was all right.
Trench foot, you know.
That's a British festival experience, a Welsh festival experience.
Definitely trench foot.
I remember in the first year, we were incredibly lucky because whilst you're right, it was the wettest festival number six we've ever done.
I remember arriving on a Thursday evening.
It was totally bucketing down.
And this carried on without stop.
All the way through Friday.
And then weirdly, in a very nice sort of way, 10 minutes before we opened the van to get the first costume off out for the carnival parade in the Saturday afternoon, suddenly the sun came out.
And then 10 minutes afterward, put the last costume away, the sun disappeared again.
And so that was great news for the carnival number six at the festival.
I can just remember one odd moment where I'm at the front trying to make sure that there's some space for us to march into and the rest of it.
And looking back and just looking and seeing yourselves, the carnival crew in the beautiful Brazilian style Maracatu costumes and looking up and seeing these hundreds of people and even more watching.
And then realizing that over to a person, whilst from the ankles upwards, everybody looked very carnival.
Of course, everybody had on the same footwear which they survived, which is that everybody, Sally and the dancers had different colored wellies on.
So it was a beautiful, sunshiny carnival parade in Wellington Boots, which I thought in our 26 year history was a first.
So yes, absolutely.
Yeah, I remember we were in wellies.
All the crowds as well.
We lived in wellies for that weekend.
No, it was fantastic.
That was fantastic.
Well, thank you very much for your carnival memories.
My pleasure.
And well, you shall be entering history towards the end of the month.
Lovely. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Jane.
That's okay. Thank you.